Safety Plan
    Way to be better prepared for the next episode of violence
    A personalized, practical plan designed to prevent injury
    An advance safety plan is important (1) because the patient may not think clearly in stressful situations due to adrenaline, (2) may not have the time to gather needed items when escaping, and (3) a support system may not have been identified
    Includes:
        How to stay safe and protect children while living with the abuser
        How to cope with emotions
        How to leave a relationship safely
        How to remain safe after leaving
Assist Patient in Developing a Safety Plan
    Provide a Safety Plan Form in a way to protect the patient’s safety, for example, keeping the Plan away from the abuser
    Discuss the reason for and importance of a Safety Plan
    Discuss each item of the Safety Plan with patient for completeness
    Answer any questions
    Discuss key ways to avoid abuser tracking patient’s actions, for example, taking the Plan home, gathering items that abuser will miss, or telling abuser “next time I will go to my mother’s”
    Respect the patient’s decisions
Assessing Safety Questions
    Where is your partner now?
    How safe do you feel returning home today?
    Do you have a plan for when you don’t feel safe?
    Has the violence been getting worse, more often, or scarier lately?
    Has your partner ever choked you, or injured you while you were pregnant?
    Has your partner ever injured someone outside the home?
    Has your partner ever injured a pet or destroyed items you cared about?
    Does your partner have an alcohol or drug abuse problem?
    Is there a gun in the house?
    Are the children in danger?
    Does your partner know you are planning to leave?
    Has your partner threatened to kill you/him/herself?
Increase safety at home
    Avoid kitchen and bathroom, since the bathroom is a small, enclosed space and the kitchen has many dangerous elements they could be used as weapons
    Remove gun/weapons from home if possible
    Put a phone in a room you can lock
    Plan an escape route
    Make a signal with neighbors to call the police
Increase children’s safety
    Teach them to call 911 and know their address and phone number
    Make a code word with them to call 911
    Plan an escape route
    Consider where the abuser is likely to think you will go (example: mother’s home) and plan accordingly
    Teach them not to get in the middle of a fight
Pack an escape bag for you and children and leave with a friend
    Clothes
    Money
    Cash, credit & ATM cards
    Change for pay phones
    Checkbook, bank account #s
    Pay stub
    Keys (house, car, office, safety deposit box)
    Medications/glasses
    Phone, phone calling card, address book, hotline numbers
    Toiletries, diapers
    Pictures, keepsakes, toys, books
    Copies of identification and important papers
    Birth certificates, passports, social security card., immigration ID papers
    Driver’s license
    Marriage/divorce/custody papers/restraining orders
    Titles, deeds, car registration
    Health insurance cards/important medical records
    School records/immunization (shot) records
    Journal/photos of abuse
    Photos of abuser to give to school, office security, etc.
