Why screen?
    Helps patient understand that abuse is wrong and abuse is not normal
    Shows your willingness to discuss abuse, even if the patient is not ready to today
    Great opportunity to educate the patient on their options
    Can help improve the lives of their children at home
    Helps end the cycle of abuse in the family
Why are healthcare settings good places to do screenings?
    Privacy and confidentiality
    Trust developed with healthcare provider
    Access to multiple services that might be needed
    Visiting a healthcare provider isn’t a change in routine
Top reasons a patient accepts intervention:
    Concern for children
    Fear for their safety
    Clinician said their home situation could be affecting their health
Things to observe:
    Does the patient’s explanation fit the injury?
    Did the patient delay seeking treatment?
    Has the patient had multiple recent ER visits?
Suggestive physical signs:
    Bruises
    Defensive injuries on forearms
    Unexplained injuries
    Rectal/genital injuries
    Burns, welts
    Bite marks
    Fractures, dislocations
    Injury during pregnancy
    Contusions to head, neck, or chest
Suggestive behaviors during pelvic exam::
    Reluctant to remove clothing
    Avoiding eye contact, fearful of eye contact
    Unexplained crying
    Exaggerated startle response to touch
    Increased muscle tension
Tips for doing routine exam:
    Maintain eye contact
    Give patient control/options
    Ask permission and let patient know exactly what you’re doing next
    Explain each step and encourage questions
Things to ask:
    Depending on how comfortable the patient is answering, use either indirect, framing, or direct statements/questions
    Indirect:
        How are things going at home?
        How do you feel about the relationships in your life?
        How are your stress levels? At work? At home?
        How does your partner treat you?
        Are you having any problems with your partner?
    Framing:
        Because domestic violence has so many effects on health, I now ask all of my patients about it
        Violence affects many families. Violence in the home may result in physical and emotional problems for you and your child. We are offering services to anyone who may be concerned about violence in their homes
        Because difficult relationships can cause health problems, we are asking all of our patients the following question: Does a partner, or anyone at home, hurt, hit, or threaten you?
    Direct:
        Are you afraid of your partner?
        Do you feel you are in danger?
        Has anyone at home ever hit you or tried to injure you in any way?
        Has anyone close to you ever threatened or hurt you?
        Does your partner ever try to control you by threatening to hurt you or your family?
        Do you ever feel controlled or isolated by your partner?
Things to say:
    Thank you for telling me. I know it was difficult to do.
    I believe you.
    You are not alone.
     This is against the law.
    I’m very glad you told me. I care. I’m concerned about the health and safety of you and your children.
    I’m sorry you have been hurt.
    I understand how difficult it is to change this situation. It may take some time to figure out what to do.
Avoid Saying:
    What did you do to make him hit you?
    If it were me, I wouldn’t put up with this.
    Why don’t you just leave?
    Why would you stay with someone like that?
    Why did you wait so long to say something?
    Have you tried marriage counseling?